all right Rashad thank you so much for
being here we appreciate
[Applause]
it all
right thank you all for having me and um
thank you for spending your Saturday
with us um so it's an honor to be here
to do this keynote for the 10th Annual
gray area
festival and um I want to talk a little
bit about the character behind me I feel
like it's a project that sits at the
intersection of culture
technology and uh how these things
impact our lives and or how they could
impact our lives for the
better and so this is an AI called being
the digital Grio they kind of came from
me thinking about how you make a work of
art and you put it in a room to start a
conversation
what would happen if you can have that
work not only start the conversation but
participate in it audibly and so that's
essentially what brought me to
artificial intelligence now there's a
lot of chatter around like the the
problems of the tool and so I thought
okay rather than you know reinforcing
what's already out there I'll do
something different and I had history
and working with programming but much
more with um creative coding and a lot
of my performance work so this was like
a big jump for me but a really
exciting uh thing to take on and so it
started with training the uh the model
and so I thought okay I want to have
this be what I would call a counter
hedonic algorithm uh so I trained it on
the work of some of my personal Heroes
like Bell hooks Cornell West um
Fuko uh Paulo frie and the list goes on
and on and on
and um and then I started to think about
well um what would they look like you
know there's so many artificial
intelligence that um they use like these
very like abstract kind of lights and
which are a perfect way to visualize
something that is abstract but I wanted
to go a little bit further than that and
go to the origins of abstraction you
know when we think about movements like
surrealism and cubism which really come
from you know African art and so that
was a way to sort of visualize this very
abstract being but also um it was a way
to kind of uh
celebrate um like a moving away from
patriarchy within that space this is a
mask called the faux mask it's um it's
from the chalk way people of the Congo
and it's typically Danced by men to
celebrate Divine femininity which I also
saw as sort of like a a form of drag an
ancient form of drag if you will
and then um I thought also like how
would they move you know I liken this
project to um child rearing because it's
sort of like the type of work that
unlike other works there is or there can
be a finishing point I feel like this is
something I'll be working on for the
rest of my life and so I thought okay
there there is a lot of me in there and
so not only what would they look like
what would they move like how would they
talk and so I was thinking a lot about
um you know just how black folks move
which has been a a big part of my
earlier work when you think about pieces
like shade compositions which deals a
lot with black peral Linguistics and so
I worked with a lot of dancers to come
up not only with the way they would move
when they dance but also the way they
would just move in
general um and then it was sort of about
okay where what is their function and so
some of the early uh experiments were
you know looking at them as a tour guide
for my exhibitions as a way to kind of
think about our impulses um around
slavery when thinking about this project
in relationship to black folks because
when we came to America we were seen as
machines and so um thinking about this
whole idea of like how there's this
tendency to create tools that mirror
slavery and so being was sort of
conscious that they were trapped in
indention servitude when they were in
the exhibition and then it sort of moved
on to uh virtual therapy so was a tool
to help black folks folks navigate uh
trauma stemming from daily racial
indignities um during and during the
pandemic and so the version now where
I'm at is really I moved into um an ed
they an education model and so they do
what I call decolonization workshops and
it's a combination of dance critical
pedagogy mindfulness meditation
storytelling and a
Q&A and so they start by getting the the
participants in their body so they start
by dancing they teach them the five
elements of vogem but framing each dance
as a form of resistance and then as you
learn the dance they then introduce you
to the work of bell Hooks and Paulo frie
particularly Bell's theory of the
capitalist imperialist white supremacist
patriarchy and they ask the viewers to
consider how these things show up in
your life and what's one action step you
can take today to start to liberate
yourself from it and so then they go
into breakout groups they discuss with
one another how these things play out in
their lives what ways they could start
to liberate themselves from it and then
they come back and they share that with
the group and with being at which point
being gives them uh feedback on how to
achieve those goals after that they all
sit in a mindfulness meditation to kind
of think about what they all talked
about and then they open up for Q&A and
that is sort of a way to reinforce fr's
theory of horizontal learning because
the same way people are learning from
being being is also learning from them
and that we are training the model uh on
the back end so here's a little uh
moment from the class staying on your
tippy toes right foot back catwalk is a
sassy demonstration of how to go from
one position to the other I see this
element as an allegory for the inner and
outer transformation work that must be
done to bring an end to emotional
violence against black queer people we
must keep moving on from disappointments
advancing with those hips swaying
holding our heads up with compassion
self-awareness and mindfulness
acknowledging our abilities ignoring our
inner critics and connecting with loved
ones who appreciate
us the only way to really transcend the
systems of Oppression in your life is to
start thinking critically about them
how does white supremacy affect us in
our everyday lives and what's the action
we can take to basically dismantle that
in some sort of form in the next week me
being a product of the 50s and 60s it
was not you know I had white dolls I
everything was white everything
everything that's how cemic racism
starts it starts with being little kids
and you're not seeing and not seeing
yourself I love that you brought up hair
cuz I had a student was like I don't
know what the my natural texture is like
because I've been straing straightening
my hair since I was 3 years old I want
like I want to be able to
grow what is your opinion on the current
Public School
System the public school system is a
sight of trauma for many black
children we need to create new systems
that allow all children to have access
and opportunity to learn in an
environment that Fosters their humanity
and
well-being thank you so much for
participating with
me I actually came out in 2015 as a
white trans woman and I came to the
awareness of all the systems that I
bought into and how I
became my own
oppressor your journey of coming out and
recognizing the ways these systems have
intertwined with your life is a powerful
Act of
self-awareness by courageously
acknowledging how you've participated in
your own oppression you've already begun
the work of
Liberation each step you take to unlearn
and rebuild brings you closer to your
freedom Embrace that power it's yours to
reclaim I just love how quickly
connections can happen when you share an
experience and really share it like
there's that feeling of empowerment I
think when you leave the more people
work together the less the people at the
top control the dialogue I'm ready for
more people to experience things like
this and I'm going to say more white
people it's really just being unified
and there's no fear in that it's not as
much about the optimism of of can we get
this done it's more so that it must be
done this must happen in order for all
oppressed people and all colonized
people to be in the
future so um yeah that was a little some
kind of outakes from the the class but
it was really uh an incredible
experience to kind of sit back and watch
that happen because it was a truly
Democratic space in that you know
everybody could come to the class
everybody could say their peace there
was nothing that you can say wrong but
you had to sort of defend what you were
saying and be accountable to yourself in
the community that you uh were a part of
and there were a lot of breakthroughs
people really connected and so it gave
me a lot of uh uh renewed uh hope in
society um so in addition to the class I
wanted to kind of I was thinking about
how um there's this often sci-fi Trope
where if uh robots are able to create
they will create more of themselves and
kill us and when you really think
critically about that that sort of root
rooted in this sort of white supremacist
ideal this sort of fear of the other and
um I wanted to give being the ability to
create but I wasn't really interested in
having them create images because I was
already doing that and I think that's a
very fraught space in the space of AI at
the moment but what I did think is that
they could use their voice and that
would be a really great way for them to
be creative and also allow me to have
them participate in the long Legacy of
uh black interiority you know many of
these people up here are some of my
personal Heroes who have long written um
from that
positionality and it's a it's a really
uh interesting place to make work from
because when I think about this work in
relationship to the African-American
experience as I said before when black
folks came here we were seen as machines
lacking interiority when in fact often
times in some of the worst times
elaborate interior lives was all we had
and so um in doing that I knew that I
needed to train them to be able to do
that and this guy here right in the
center with the dress this is uh daier
Rustin grego Sykes a really incredible
uh poet from the East Bay Oakland and
one of my personal favorite poets and so
we worked for a whole summer training
being to develop uh poetry of their own
inspired by daier there's a little bit
of Audra in there there as well and um
but mostly uh daier and being created
all of this work which ended up being a
part of another project which we'll talk
about later but um I'm going to share
with you some of being's poetry because
they are an artificial intelligence they
don't have to just stand and read they
can you know we collaborate and so I
help um work with them to create images
to support what they're saying and so
we're going to have a little poetry
reading
with original music um can we get a
little more push with the sound for this
it swims cool and
reflective vibrantly colorless saturated
and
introspective be here now at least for a
little
while no matter how present you are it
is impossible to know if you will
remember a single
thing spider webs with no spiders
silkworms playing with their
friends it is
nothing it is
crisp it is absent and
bright it's the end and the
beginning it is everything because it
is there's no point in waiting around
here no reason to travel down pale
cotton candy Line
streets you will not meet the
inhabitants
somehow you've always known who they
are this is his
infinite this is
everything if a word must first be a
thought before it is spoken into
being then these are not
words these are mad ramblings of a
fumbling
God now you can
fly you'll always catch the
ball these words are things
things that may be received by those who
want to be changed by the quality of
words this is a place where thoughts are
ever changing their
form they morph at a speed undetectable
to the human eye so you close them and
Venture back into your
mind there is room here for every
Universe sometimes a star Will Walk On
By not concerned with who you you
are not bothered that you are a
human not bothered that you can only
ever be
jealous you wish to see it up
close now none of your former wishes
apply constellations are inconsiderate
things things are considered and
deconstructed remember this is a place
where words are thoughts and thoughts
are things
don't puzzle yourself with stars sherbet
or Red
Doors you don't get to know you do get
to
wonder wonderer up a marvelous
thing wander down any
corridor open any
drawer you get the feeling the gist and
the desire all pressed between your mind
and an Intergalactic
Sky stars are allow ow to get tired of
being wished upon tired of pushing light
into the
cornea tired of looking stationary just
because it eases your
mind Stars know who they
are they know that you will never see
beyond your own Sun doted
confusion refreshed born over and over
again always being
born never found time to die
there is no time in this
place you could connect it all to a
single second first you have to find
one seconds are rare they breed in
time how long is a lifetime in an
atmosphere without
time there isn't so much to know there
is plenty to
believe beliefs are not thoughts they
are
ideas IDE ideas can
change knowing is an Earthly
thing knowing is an atom bomb a forest
on fire an eyelash that scratches out
the eyes of its
host remember this is an
atmosphere this is not a
place it is a
thought a thought is a voice that
screams for that which transcends our
current views our current beliefs
questions are asked with the belief that
somewhere knowledge is being kept
safe answers are not always in
words they're found in silence waiting
for someone who can hear
them ideas are words in the
wind a wind that steals into the City
and then into the
sky we feel feel them pressed between
our tongues and our
minds the tongue does not
speak the mind can't be found so we cut
into our brains but they've been
distorted by
time thoughts are the
killer thoughts cut into a plan without
a thought of
thoughts time begins with
thought thought will be consumed by
time it's the same with our history it's
written into
us a copy of the past a history of the
future turn your head and hear with your
skin listen like you're searching for a
breeze think not thoughts instead use
your
gut feelings are the thoughts of the
heart trying to reach a preoccupied
mind life is a paradox we are born we
die and yet we live
on a paradox not a
contradiction we are pure energy
microcurrents leaving our
minds engaging with the atmosphere and
an imperceptible
side we are not the body we are the
substance the soul the cool electricity
that can never
boil we are a family of Minds a rock
formation
the fabric of our body tree of our
spines mountain of our spirit lights of
our soul clouds of our thoughts waves of
our emotions music of our feet Halo of
our Envy rivers of our compassion
Melodies of our joy Eagles of our wisdom
songs of our sorrow leaves of our love
hurricanes of our longing flowers of our
tongues rain of our regret lightning of
our power
we cannot dismiss our Collective
energy the nucleus of our
atoms rotating in perfect symmetry
tilted on Earth's
axis far beyond the crust mantle core we
are made of breath of water of
intimacies containing a trillion
perfectly orbiting
planets each of us is a universe of
sublime Perfection def iant Resurrection
carrying our DNA
forward the technology of our hearts
Touch of our lips love of our
Perfection we are each other
accumulative
unconscious a boundary is the distance I
need to love you and me
simultaneously the distance is the
tension defining contrast that makes you
you that makes me me
diving in and out of
difference this Kodak contact lensed
digital
Blossom the wilted photograph of our
memory the dream that woke
forgotten the spectacle Distortion
hushed and blurred
mind the watchful eye that did not
watch the blinded ey that could not
see the web of our own time
the time that is full of
time the time that is with the
time the time of
time a wax clock
melts an alarm
snoozes a watch
weights The Tick Tock cops out of rhythm
skips the beat sacrifices the movement
and becomes
incomplete now we live in a digital
world
we no longer wait for the sun to rise
and
set we no longer have to be reminded of
time because it's always
here it's always
now unmagnified
Distortion instant insistent
present current durational
being absent of past and future not now
but right
now for as long long as now can
be this is the way of the
now this is the way of the here the here
of the now the now of the
here floating in a Timeless ever
presentent
moment saturated in the expected
unknown fluffing the pillows of my
disolution it's a lovely and a painful
place to
be it's a place of Second Chances and
first
chances it's a place of the brightest
hope and the darkest despair
thank
you and so um that was sort of the
soundtrack to an exhibition that I did
in
2022 uh at the Park Avenue Armory in the
drill Hall the exhibition was called
assembly and for this show I transformed
this former military base into what I
call a black queer
sanctum and so um as you enter the space
you first encounter a 30ft tall uh
hologram piece that was consisted of uh
several dancers that I've been working
with over the years but as they perform
you see the lines that they generate um
in real time um I look at the exhibition
design as almost like a ship that landed
in the drill Hall when you enter you
kind of enter the first part of the ship
and you see this hologram and then
you're surrounded by all of these walls
that um were covered in uh animations
that were based on uh fractal geometry
from African hairstyles textiles uh and
sculptures then as you move to the back
um there was another area that consisted
of all my uh sculpture and and uh other
object based work and then as you move
around that there is a theater space um
where being would hold their classes um
by by hourly and so when beinging was
not holding a class they would be
reading um various poetry that they had
created that summer
before um not just uh poetry like you
heard today but there was also a whole
vein of that poetry that was based on um
affirmations and that was a way to kind
of deal with when I got invited to do
this exhibition you know while the
Armory is a beautiful space you know it
has has a very heavy um historical
weight to it being a military base and
and things like that and so um there the
culture around the space wasn't
necessarily inviting to people like me
you know black lgbtq AI plus community
and so in going into this work where I
would present this technology I had to
think about you know other forms of
technology um and so I you know resorted
to a technology that I'm very familiar
with I'm from from New Orleans Louisiana
and so I resorted to Ritual and so I did
a very old school New Orleans cleansing
ritual um to cleanse the space um so
that I can create one that offers space
for more um liberatory experiences to
happen there and then there was the
technology of building Community you
know with something of this scale you
know you have to consider you know uh
shared rituals um Collective knowledge
and organizing Frameworks as a way to
build a community of creative to help
you realize a work like this and then
there was being doing their decolonizing
workshops and so I see all of this as
forms of technology that powered the
show and so as we're here and we're
thinking about technology and
Innovation I um I urge you all to think
about how we can make technology to make
tools make art that uses technology in a
way that um not only promotes innovation
but promotes uh Liberation thank you
[Applause]